RAG ingestion and chat pipelines (#161)
instructlab/dev-docs: docs/rag/ilab-rag-retrieval.md

This document proposes enhancements to the `ilab` CLI to support workflows utilizing Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) artifacts within `InstructLab`. The proposed changes introduce new commands and options for the embedding ingestion
and RAG-based chat pipelines:
* A new `ilab data` sub-command to process customer documentation.
  * Either from knowledge taxonomy or from actual user documents.
* A new `ilab data` sub-command to generate and ingest embeddings from pre-processed documents into a configured vector store.
* An option to enhance the chat pipeline by using the stored embeddings to augment the context of conversations, improving relevance and accuracy.

### 1.1 User Experience Overview
The commands are tailored to support diverse user experiences, all enabling the use of RAG functionality to enrich chat sessions.

### 1.2 Model Training Path
This flow is designed for users who aim to train their own models and leverage the source documents that support knowledge submissions to enhance the chat context:
![model-training](./images/rag-model-training.png)

**Note**: documents are processed using `instructlab-sdg` package and are defined using the docling v1 schema.

> ### 1.3 Tanomony Path (no Training)

Reviewer: "Tanomony" should be "Taxonomy"

also laying the foundation for future implementations of state-of-the-art RAG artifacts tailored to specific use
cases.

#### Command Options
To maintain compatibility and simplicity, no new configurations will be introduced for new commands. Instead,
the settings will be defined using the following hierarchy (options higher in the list overriding those below):
* CLI flags (e.g., `--FLAG`).
* Environment variables following a consistent naming convention, such as `ILAB_<UPPERCASE_FLAG_NAME>`.
* Default values, for all the applicable use cases.

For example, the `vectordb-uri` argument can be implemented using the `click` module like this:
```py
@click.option(
    "--document-store-uri",
    default='rag-output.db',
    envvar="ILAB_DOCUMENT_STORE_URI",
)
```

#### Local embedding models
The embedding model used to generate text embeddings must be downloaded locally before executing the pipeline.

For example, this command can be used to download the `sentence-transformers/all-minilm-l6-v2` model to the local models cache:
```bash
ilab model download -rp sentence-transformers/all-minilm-l6-v2

> ```

Reviewer: You don't need to include `--hf-token` if the `HF_TOKEN` environment variable is set to your Huggingface token.

If the configured embedding model has not been cached, the command execution will terminate with an error. This requirement applies
consistently to all new and updated commands.

### 2.2 Document Processing Pipeline
The proposal is to add a `process`  sub-command to the `data` command group.

For the Taxonomy path (no Model Training): 
```
ilab data process --output /path/to/processed/folder
```

> For the Plag-and-Play RAG path: 

Reviewer: "Plag" is misspelled.  It should be "Plug".

│  • /r: toggle the status of the RAG pipeline.                                                                                     │
│  • /md <int>: previous response in Markdown based on input, if passed 1 then previous, if 2 then second last response and so on.  │
│  • /s filepath: save current session to filepath                                                                                  │
│  • /l filepath: load filepath and start a new session                                                                             │
│  • /L filepath: load filepath (permanently) and start a new session                                                               │
│                                                                                                                                   │
│ Press Alt (or Meta) and Enter or Esc Enter to end multiline input.                                                                │
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

### 2.8 RAG Chat Options

> As we stated in [2.1 Working Assumptions](#21-working-assumption), we will introduce new configuration options for the spceific `chat` command,

Reviewer: "spceific" should be "specific"

but we'll use flags and environment variables for the options that come from the embedding ingestion pipeline command.

| Configuration FQN | Description | Default Value | CLI Flag | Environment Variable |
|-------------------|-------------|---------------|----------|----------------------|
| chat.rag.enabled | Enable or disable the RAG pipeline. | `false` | `--rag` (boolean)| `ILAB_RAG` |
| chat.rag.retriever.top_k | The maximum number of documents to retrieve. | `10` | `--retriever-top-k` | `ILAB_RETRIEVER_TOP_K` |
| | Document store implementation, one of: `milvuslite`, **TBD** | `milvuslite` | `--document-store-type` | `ILAB_DOCUMENT_STORE_TYPE` |

> | | Document storeservice URI. | `./embeddings.db` | `--document-store-uri` | `ILAB_DOCUMENT_STORE_URI` |

Reviewer: Should "storeservice" be "store service"?  Or is this one word for a reason?

the settings will be defined using the following hierarchy (options higher in the list overriding those below):

* CLI flags (e.g., `--FLAG`).
* Environment variables following a consistent naming convention, such as `ILAB_<UPPERCASE_FLAG_NAME>`.
* Default values, for all the applicable use cases.

For example, the `vectordb-uri` argument can be implemented using the `click` module like this:

```py
@click.option(
    "--document-store-uri",
    default='rag-output.db',
    envvar="ILAB_DOCUMENT_STORE_URI",
)
```

#### Local embedding models

The embedding model used to generate text embeddings must be downloaded locally before executing the pipeline.

For example, this command can be used to download the `ibm-granite/granite-embedding-125m-english` model to the local models cache:

```bash
ilab model download -rp ibm-granite/granite-embedding-125m-english
```

If the configured embedding model has not been cached, the command execution will terminate with an error. This requirement applies
consistently to all new and updated commands.

### 2.2 Document Processing Pipeline

> The proposal is to add a `process` sub-command to the `rag` command group.

Reviewer: `process` should be `convert` now

  --embedding-model TEXT          The embedding model name
  --output-dir TEXT               Directory where generated datasets are
                                  stored.
  --input DIRECTORY               Directory where pre-processed documents are
                                  located.
  --help                          Show this message and exit.
```

| Option Description | Default Value | CLI Flag | Environment Variable |
|--------------------|---------------|----------|----------------------|
| Document store implementation, one of: `milvuslite`, **TBD** | `milvuslite` | `--document-store-type` | `ILAB_DOCUMENT_STORE_TYPE` |
| Document store service URI. | `./embeddings.db` | `--document-store-uri` | `ILAB_DOCUMENT_STORE_URI` |
| Document store collection name. | `IlabEmbeddings` | `--document-store-collection-name` | `ILAB_DOCUMENT_STORE_COLLECTION_NAME` |
| Base directories where models are stored. | `$HOME/.cache/instructlab/models`  | `--retriever-embedder-model-dir` | `ILAB_EMBEDDER_MODEL_DIR` |
| Name of the embedding model. | **TBD** | `--retriever-embedder-model-name` | `ILAB_EMBEDDER_MODEL_NAME` |

### 2.6 RAG Chat Pipeline Command

> The proposal is to add a `chat.rag.enable` configuration (or the equivalent `--rag` flag) to the `model chat` command, like:

Reviewer: This is also gated on ILAB_DEV_PREVIEW, right?  If so, let's make that explicit here.

Reviewer 2: +1

```bash
ilab model chat --rag
```

#### Command Purpose

This command enhances the existing `ilab model chat` functionality by integrating contextual information retrieved from user-provided documents,
enriching the conversational experience with relevant insights.

#### Revised chat pipeline

* Start with the user's input, `user_query`.
* Use the given `user_query` to retrieve relevant contextual information from the embedding database (semantic search).
* Append the retrieved context to the original LLM request.
* Send the context augmented request to the LLM and return the response to the user.

#### Prompt Template

A default non-configurable template is used with parameters to specify the user query and the context, like:

```text
Given the following information, answer the question.
Context:
{context}
Question: 
{user_query}
Answer:
```

Future extensions should align prompt management with the existing InstructLab design.

### 2.7 RAG Chat Commands

> The `/r` command may be added to the `ilab model chat` command to dynamically toggle the execution of the RAG pipeline.

Reviewer: Again, let's qualify this by saying that `/r` will only appear in this help list and only work if ILAB_DEV_PREVIEW is true.

# Design Proposal - Embedding Ingestion Pipeline And RAG-Based Chat

Not addressed in this document:

* Vector store authentication options.
* Document versioning and data update policies.
* Unify prompt management in InstructLab. See (`chat_template` [configuration][chat_template] and
`augment_chat_template` [function][augment_chat_template])

**Author**: Daniele Martinoli

**Version**: 0.1

**Options to Rebuild Excalidraw Diagrams**

* Using this [shareable link][shareable-excalidraw]
* Importing the scene from the exported [DSL](./images/rag-ingestion-and-chat.excalidraw)
* Importing the provided images in Excalidraw
* Importing the provided images in Excalidraw

## 1. Introduction

This document proposes enhancements to the `ilab` CLI to support workflows utilizing Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) artifacts within `InstructLab`. The proposed changes introduce new commands and options for the embedding ingestion
and RAG-based chat pipelines:

> * A new `ilab rag` command group, feature gated behind a `ILAB_DEV_PREVIEW` environment variable.

Reviewer 3: What's the point of the feature gate?

Reviewer: @cdoern and @bbrowning were concerned that if this were released as dev preview without a gate that it would set expectations that this command would continue to exist, but in reality we haven't really converged on a long term CLI for this functionality.

Reviewer 3: Gotcha - personally I would simply prefer some kind of user alert (i.e. something like "NOTE: This is an experimental command at this time - once fully supported this warning will go away) over a env var-based feature gate - but if there was a previous convo about this I won't muck up the works, I don't feel _that_ strongly about it :smile:

Reviewer 4: Honestly, going in and trying to implement this, it seems a lot simpler to put a warning on it. Especially since some of the new options are for existing command groups, e.g. `chat.rag.enabled`.

Reviewer: I would also prefer a warning, but @cdoern and @bbrowning seemed pretty firm in their insistence on a feature gate.

Reviewer 4: After an offline discussion yesterday, where we landed is that experimental options would cause the application to simply exit with an error message if used without the dev flag being set.

> * A new `ilab rag` sub-command  group to process customer documentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* A new `ilab rag` sub-command group to process user documentation.
```

* An option to enhance the chat pipeline by using the stored embeddings to augment the context of conversations, improving relevance and accuracy.

### 1.1 User Experience Overview

The commands are tailored to support diverse user experiences, all enabling the use of RAG functionality to enrich chat sessions.

### 1.2 Model Training Path

This flow is designed for users who aim to train their own models and leverage the source documents that support knowledge submissions to enhance the chat context:
![model-training](./images/rag-model-training.png)

**Note**: documents are processed using `instructlab-sdg` package and are defined using the docling v1 schema.

### 1.3 Taxonomy Path (no Training)

This flow is for users who have defined taxonomy knowledge but prefer not to train their own models. Instead, they aim to generate RAG artifacts from source documents to enhance the chat context:
![taxonomy-no-training](./images/rag-taxonomy-no-training.png)

**Note**: documents are processed using `docling.DocumentConverter` and are defined using the docling v2 schema.

> ### 1.4 Plug-and-Play RAG Path

Author: I will move it on top of the list, let me know if this is enough. IMO this seems the "main" use case for demo purposes, but in the long run Model Training one may take priority for production cases (together with fine-tuned embedding model, probably)

the settings will be defined using the following hierarchy (options higher in the list overriding those below):

* CLI flags (e.g., `--FLAG`).
* Environment variables following a consistent naming convention, such as `ILAB_<UPPERCASE_FLAG_NAME>`.
* Default values, for all the applicable use cases.

For example, the `vectordb-uri` argument can be implemented using the `click` module like this:

```py
@click.option(
    "--document-store-uri",
    default='rag-output.db',
    envvar="ILAB_DOCUMENT_STORE_URI",
)
```

#### Local embedding models

The embedding model used to generate text embeddings must be downloaded locally before executing the pipeline.

For example, this command can be used to download the `ibm-granite/granite-embedding-125m-english` model to the local models cache:

```bash
ilab model download -rp ibm-granite/granite-embedding-125m-english
```

If the configured embedding model has not been cached, the command execution will terminate with an error. This requirement applies
consistently to all new and updated commands.

### 2.2 Document Processing Pipeline

> The proposal is to add a `convert` sub-command to the `rag` command group.

Reviewer 3: I will note there is an existing `ilab model convert` command - I think we can still use `convert` here, but if another term works for this purpose that may be simpler for users

### 2.3 Document Processing Pipeline Options

**Note**: The `--help` option will be aware of the `rag` command group only if `ILAB_DEV_PREVIEW` environment variable is set to `true`.

```bash
% ilab rag convert --help
Usage: ilab rag convert [OPTIONS]

  The document processing pipeline for retrieval augmented generation

Options:
  --input DIRECTORY     The folder with user documents to process. In case
                        it's missing, the knowledge taxonomy files will be
                        processed instead.
  --taxonomy-path PATH  Directory where taxonomy is stored and accessed from.
  --taxonomy-base TEXT  Branch of taxonomy used to calculate diff against.
  --output DIRECTORY    Directory where processed docs are stored.
  --help                Show this message and exit.
```

| Option Description | Default Value | CLI Flag | Environment Variable |
|--------------------|---------------|----------|----------------------|
| Location folder of user documents. In case it's missing, the taxonomy is navigated to look for updated knowledge documents.|  | `--input` | `ILAB_PROCESS_INPUT` |

> | Location folder of processed documents. |  | `--ouput` | `ILAB_PROCESS_OUTPUT` |

Reviewer: @anastasds , should ILAB_PROCESS_INPUT and ILAB_PROCESS_OUTPUT be ILAB_CONVERT_INPUT and ILAB_CONVERT_OUTPUT, since process was renamed to convert?

Reviewer 4: Yes, missed that, thanks - submitted fix in https://github.com/dmartinol/dev-docs/pull/4

Author: Merged, thanks!

  (e.g. `_HOME_/.local/share/instructlab/datasets`).
  * In particular, only the latest folder with name starting by `documents-` will be explored.
  * It must include a subfolder `docling-artifacts` with the actual json files.
* In case the */path/to/processed/folder* parameter is provided, it is used to lookup the processed documents to ingest.

**Notes**:

* To ensure consistency and avoid issues with document versioning or outdated embeddings, the ingested collection will be cleared before execution.
  This ensures it contains only the embeddings generated from the most recent run.

### Ingestion-Why We Need It

To populate embedding vector stores with pre-processed information that can be used at chat inference time.

#### Ingestion-Supported Databases

The command may support various vector database types. A default configuration will align with the selected
InstructLab technology stack.

#### Ingestion-Usage

The generated embeddings can later be retrieved from a vector database and converted to text, enriching the
context for RAG-based chat pipelines.

### 2.5 Embedding Ingestion Pipeline Options

> **Note**: The `--help` option will be aware of the `rag` command group only if `ILAB_DEV_PREVIEW` environment variable is set to `true`.

Reviewer 2: note the env variable name here as well

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Note**: The `--help` option will be aware of the `rag` command group only if `ILAB_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL` environment variable is set to `true`.
```

  * **Embedding models**: Handle embedding models using the appropriate embedder implementation for the
    chosen framework (e.g., Haystack).
  * Consider using factory functions to abstract implementations and enhance code flexibility.
* Optional dependencies for 3rd party integrations should be defined in `pyproject.toml` and documented for
  clarity. Users can install optional components with commands like:

  `pip install instructlab[milvus]`

  3rd party dependencies may also be grouped in files such as `requirements/milvus.txt`.

## 4. Future Enhancements

### 4.1 Model Evaluation

**TODO** A separate ADR will be defined.

### 4.2 Advanced RAG retrieval steps

* [Ranking retriever's result][ranking]:

```bash
ilab model chat --rag --ranking --ranking-top-k=5 --ranking-model=cross-encoder/ms-marco-MiniLM-L-12-v2
```

* [Query expansion][expansion]:

```bash
ilab model chat --rag --query-expansion --query-expansion-prompt="$QUERY_EXPANSION_PROMPT" --query-expansion-num-of-queries=5
```

* Using retrieval strategy:

```bash
ilab model chat --rag --retrieval-strategy query-expansion --retrieval-strategy-options="prompt=$QUERY_EXPANSION_PROMPT;num_of_queries=5"

> ```

Reviewer 5: This kind of option can make usage more complicated, especially when multiple parameters need to be configured together?

Reviewer: I agree.  I think more consideration is needed for how we will enable retrieval strategy configuration.  I think that should be addressed in a future document though; for this document, I would recommend just adding a note indicating that the entire "future enhancements" section is just some preliminary thoughts on the sorts of things we might add in the future.

Author: > I would recommend just adding a note indicating that the entire "future enhancements" section is just some preliminary thoughts on the sorts of things we might add in the future.

Agree

* ...

### 4.3 Containerized Indexing Service

Generate a containerized RAG artifact to expose a `/query` endpoint that can serve as an alternative source :

```bash
ilab rag ingest --build-image --image-name=docker.io/user/my_rag_artifacts:1.0
```

Then serve it and use it in a chat session:

```bash
ilab serve --rag-embeddings --image-name=docker.io/user/my_rag_artifacts:1.0 --port 8123
ilab model chat --rag --retriever-type api --retriever-uri http://localhost:8123
```

> 

Reviewer 5: There are many options, but during issues handling, it was found that users either don’t know about or can’t use them correctly, especially when some options need to be used together, like `--retriever-type` and `--retriever-uri`. Only the developers who wrote it might know about this. To make it easier for users to understand, can we emphasize this in the help message or is there a better way to handle it?
